Get a speaking list going to
Publicly, Hopefully.
Welcome Minister on the road. What a leadership.
What a what A busy minister leadership.
Sorry. God. I, sorry, I just dropped you. Um, yeah, we,
We, we thought you'd rolled the car.
We saw that, um, it was, um, rolling and not the car.
Um, thank you for joining us today, um, again,
and we appreciate you making yourself available.
I understand you're traveling in, um, uhor somewhere today.
So thanks for, um, keeping this, uh, appointment.
Uh, we had just heard from the, uh, NEMA officials on the,
the bill, and you're our first submitter as the,
as the minister moving this bill.
So we do have 15 minutes with you.
Uh, people will have, I think, have some questions,
but would you like to just make a few minutes
of opening points on, on this bill winner?
No. First of all, I just wanna thank you Madam Chair
and also the committee for allowing me the flexibility of,
um, being able to call in like this
and not be there in person because, um, you know, that
that is very much appreciated.
Um, look, I'm conscious of the fact
that we've only got 15 minutes,
so I don't wanna waste your time.
I'd rather just go straight to, um,
any questions that you might have.
I understand that, um, you know, the, the Nima, Dave
and the team and the officials have been in front
of you answering any questions.
If you've got anything for me, um, you know, just fire away.
Thank you. Um, I'll just start off,
if you don't mind minister with, um, one
of the key objectives as stated in the book, bill,
is the role of Iwi Maori.
And I know that you've commented on the, uh, integral role
that, um, Marai in particular play during emergencies.
Um, we do have, uh, an ability in this bill for, um,
local representatives to be included at the planning stages.
And I just, I wanted to get your feedback on that
and whether you would like the committee to look at, um,
the sufficiency of that, um, provision in the bill,
or if there's anything else you were looking for us
to particularly, uh, focus on
during the submission process in that area.
Yeah, I, yeah, that's a really good point to raise.
Look, the only thing that I'd say to the committee is that,
um, you know, you should have a very open mind
to any use submissions that are brought forward as a result
of the, um, tropical low that we just had come through.
And obviously it's been pretty devastating for us
as a country with the loss of nine people
and still searching for one.
Um, and so there may be some fresh submissions come through,
um, as a result of that, um, that may mean
that we can make some changes.
So I know Madam Chair, that, um, with your level
of engagement on this, that, um,
and I'm sure the committee will, will support you that, um,
if there are some good submissions that come forward
that need to be looked at
and could strengthen the bill,
then, you know, let's do that.
Um, in relation to the KE yes, that I've,
I've had many conversations with a lot of the iwi,
both the Iwi impacted, uh, with the weather event that came
through right from Northland through to the, um, east Cape
and um, and also with engagement with the Iwi leaders at,
um, at Yang.
And that there's been really good, um,
conversations had there
and lots of support for what we're doing with the bill
and the fact that it's critically important.
They do have a seat, um, at the table, which
of course we codify in this legislation.
Thank you. And thank you for invitation
to, uh, look at the submissions.
We, um, have already asked the team if there's any areas
to focus on for us,
and they said that they'll get back to us on that too.
So we are keen to, uh,
make some proactive contributions as well.
I'll just check if there's anyone else wants to ask.
Yes, yep. I've go to Andy Foster. Thank you Minister. Um,
Mark, great to see you out on the job
and thank you for the work you're doing.
Um, the, thanks
Anne. The
question I'm just following up on is just one of,
I have asked the officials here,
but um, I know I've al also asked you, um,
is just in the bill, is there enough around making sure
that there's an interface between a reduction from an
emergency management point of view?
So we try and avoid the emergency in the first place.
Um, and things like planning in particularly, you know,
you're talking about land use and RMA stuff.
Is there enough there that actually makes
sure that's gonna happen?
We stop building dumb things in dumb places?
Well, that, that's captured in the fact that, um,
you know, district and,
and regional councils have to provide plans around, um,
exactly that, around risk management and, uh,
and, uh, mitigation.
So that's a, that's a definite change from
where we have been in the past.
Well, I think it's definitely
been strengthened in the bill.
Um, but at the end of the day, Andy, you, you know, the,
the issue that you raise is a critical one
for us, the country.
It's a really difficult
and complex one when you're talking about managed retreat.
Um, you know, certainly around existing communities,
but, um, and, and from my experience, both district
and regional councils are very sensitive to that.
And without a doubt there's a fresh focus
and energy that's been brought to making sure
that there's serious planning go into it.
That's excellent. Um, look,
and the other area if I can is just, uh, the location of,
of emergency equipment at a, at a high level.
I was on the West coast, um, uh, just before Christmas.
They were very anxious about
where particularly things like Bailey
Bridges, 'cause they've got a lot of rivers there.
We're located, which at the moment they're all in Canterbury
in the South island and Hawkes Bay in the north.
Similarly, we, we have, uh, issues around, uh,
the East Cape in particular, um, just thought to going,
where going locating really critical emergency equipment
storage of, of vital facilities like, um, fuel, et cetera.
And I know we've got lifelines, um, covered.
Have we got those well enough being thought through
by the relevant agencies?
The short answer is yes.
Um, but there's always an emergency management,
there's always ongoing work and improvement.
Um, that's just the nature of the type of work
that they do, that everyone does.
Um, the, the Prime Minister himself has had a big focus on
what equipment do we have and where is it placed.
So there is some work being done at DPMC on that.
Um, and uh, yeah, so no, there's, there's, um, there's,
there is some work being done around that.
And the other, the other point I was gonna make, Andy, is
that the paper that I'm taking relates directly to
how do we better prepare ourselves
and where do we make the investment, um, as a country.
Yeah, look, so I think we'd be,
we very much benefit from getting a little bit more clarity
about some of those decisions which you made at DPMC,
which obviously was aligned much more with, um, NEMA
before, um, it went to DIA.
So, no, appreciate that. Thank you. Thank you, Tim.
Thanks, um, minister, nice to see you.
Hey, you mentioned in your opening comments about wanting
to really listen carefully to submitters,
particularly based on recent events.
Um, and I'm just wondering, is there anything
that you have seen, I know you've been really active in the
response to this as you have been across a num well,
e every, uh, sort of civil emergency we've seen.
Is there anything that you've seen in the last three weeks
that has maybe gives you, uh, cause
to think we should be looking at particular changes here?
Or are you still pretty comfortable with where it's at?
I think the only thing that I would probably highlight
to the committee and something that you could have a look at
to see whether or not these speak kind of formalized
through the, through the, uh, legislation is
that great barrier island, which of course is part of, um,
Auckland Council area, um, they get hit particularly hard.
They tend to get hit with the weather more consistent with
what the Corman or these Cape gets.
And, um, one of the issues that cinema arose
through this event was, um, should they have the,
the ability to be able to declare, um, you know, to a,
a very specific declaration for them Oh yeah.
Rather the entire area.
So, um, I don't know whether
that requires any change legislation,
but, um, if the committee wants something to have a look at,
I I'll point them in that direction.
Thank you very much. Thanks Simon.
Just, uh, minister, we just have some, um, fire dancing
outside parliament here,
so you might might be coming through a little bit.
Um, I can't, yeah.
Thank you minister. Um,
just obviously the changes is gonna put, um,
I guess additional costs onto local authorities at a time
when there's obviously pressure to reduce rates as it is.
Has there been any discussions around, um, how
that can be avoided or cost recoveries
So that work has all been done?
Um, we, we were very sensitive to that,
that the new legislation didn't pass on, um, enormous costs
to, uh, local government.
And there's been a lot of work done
by the outstanding NEMA officials
that have worked on this legislation
and, uh, working with local government.
Yeah, Thank you.
And that was actually, I was gonna follow up
that with that question too.
So it is, um, I, I think something that we often hear is,
is there enough, um, provision for local government,
they've got so many, um, so many different things
that they need to pay for
and, you know, will they have enough, a lot, enough money to
actually be able to fulfill their obligations under
this legislation?
So I think that's something we'll be looking to submit.
As for, as well, the other area that we briefly touched on,
um, was the interrelationship between the, um,
resource management area of adaptation and this bill, um,
and the team has advised us that they have been in touch
with some of the people doing that work, um,
in other parts of government.
But do you see that this bill can interrelate with the, uh,
work that's happening on adaptation effectively?
Because that's gonna be a key, um, area of preparedness?
Look, to be honest with you, Madam Dear Beth, and the, um,
and our policy team are much better to talk to
that in detail to you, um,
my expectation is the adaptation work is gonna continue.
Um, that's gonna take, you know,
it's a big piece of complicated work.
Obviously it is gonna have impacts on this legislation
and, um, whether or not we've got the flexibility
inside the bill to be,
because you don't know what you don't know.
Um, but the, the reality of it is if the, if the bill,
if it can't make the changes,
then obviously there are other mechanisms
and ways of, of being able to make sure any future work
around adaptation is,
and it needs to be captured
inside our emergency management bill.
There are ways of doing that.
You very much Yeah, well that's useful.
That, that, that does say do something else. Yeah. Did
You No, no, I, yeah, I think I'm okay with
That. Yeah. Okay. Um,
okay.
I think that's, um, that's about all the questions we have.
We're dealing with, um, some noise here at our end,
and obviously you are in the, the car there, so we won't,
um, won't, um, prolong, uh, the submission any longer.
But I think really helpful to get that, um,
guidance for you around the areas.
And we are looking to the team too, if there are other areas
that they want us to focus on as a committee,
because we are really keen to make sure
that this is the best piece of legislation that we can have.
And I appreciate the comment around Great Barrier Island,
and I noticed, um, I think we had, um,
rota City Council having some concerns around the, the state
of emergency that was declared as well.
So that's certainly an area we can take forward.
Yeah, I went on out there, um, Madam Chair,
I had Adam Mags with me and, um, they're already working
and the, um, chair of the local board out there and,
and so there, there's already some work being done on that,
um, to see whether or not we can sort
of fix it in the short term.
But, you know, it might, the committee might identify
that we can fix that in the medium to longer term.
And, and, you know, and, and even in a broader context,
because the thing about our weather events
that we have in our country is
that you can have this bizarre situation
where half the town is severely impacted
and the other half is BAU.
Um, you know, so there's,
so I think the system's gotta have a bit of flexibility
to be able to reflect that as well.
Yeah. Okay. Just one final question.
Andy. Andy's got one final
Question. Yeah, sorry, mark on,
on that one.
Um, I mean, I can remember the only state of emergency,
which we actually had declared in Wellington,
apart from COVID, um, was one that I declared
for the south coast of Wellington.
It was only the south coast because of storm swell.
So we did isolate that particular area
and see that's the only area we're interested in.
We're not interested in anything else.
Um, and that was the only area we,
so we did have the flexibility to do that.
Yes, you can do that.
And that has, that happened in the
South Island recently as well.
So I know that there was a mechanism in there for that.
Um, it's just
that the committee asked if there was another area
to have a look at as a result of what happened during the,
um, and I just, I'm just pointing you to that.
Um, and, and the other thing is just no, seriously,
if you guys spot anything,
we see anything in those submissions
that you think we should, we can strengthen the bill,
then, you know, let's do that.
I think for me it was very much that tie,
which I think you were alluding to between, um,
between the emergency management side
and things like, um, uh, adaptation and, um, mitigation.
That way, if we can do anything to strengthen it that way,
I think it's, that's a good thing to do.
Yeah, that'd be good. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Well, thank you. We are at time now, minister.
So thank you very much again for joining us.
And, um, the team, um,
of officials here have been doing a great job.
And also just to, uh, reinforce, we acknowledged, um,
the terrible situation at the beginning of this year, um,
Mount, uh, Nui
and Moo in particular, um, part
as part of our private sessions.
It's just to, um, say that, that, um, we are are very much,
uh, that that's very much at the forefront of our mind
as we work through this legislation. Yeah,
Absolutely.
Thanks Madam Chair. Thank you everyone.
Thank you. Thanks. Bye. See you. Bye.
See ya. Thank you.
Uh, so we'll now come to our next submitter who is the
Community Resilience Network,
and I think we have, uh, them Rodney.
Rodney, yeah. Welcome, uh, to, uh, come and join us, please.
Yeah. Yep.
Thank you, uh, very much for that.
We've got 10 minutes for your submission.
We have received your written, uh, submission.
Uh, and so if you wanna make some opening comments,
and then we'll move to questions from members.
Okay. Over to you.
Okay. I've just got two minute introduction.
That's perfectly fine. Yep, yep.
Okay. You can actually use the whole
time if you wish to speak.
Yeah, I understand that. It's up to you.
So, um, thank you for the opportunity to, to speak today.
Appreciate that. Um, our submission is about one simple
but critical idea that
disaster resilience cannot be built directly.
It's the outcome of strong community resilience, uh,
which we define as economic,
social, cultural, and environmental.
The government acquired to North Island severe weather
events makes clear the most serious failures occurred before
and during the early days of response
when communities were largely left to cope on their own
where outcomes were better.
It was not because the formal system arrived sooner
because community and iwi networks already active,
connected, and trusted.
The work underway in Newlands has been designed deliberately
around that reality.
Our starting assumption is that large scale
or multi reg region events,
government systems will not be able
to meet all the local needs immediately.
Planning therefore, focuses on ensuring communities can
self-organize and reduce harm
during the first five to seven days.
The period the inquiry shows is most vulnerable.
This is operationalized
through sustained investment in relationships
and trust, clearly defined community governance
and operational roles, ongoing training, mentoring
and professional supervision, shared awareness
of local vulnerabilities and assets
and simple practice mechanisms
for neighbor to neighbor support.
Importantly, this work does not replace councils CDM groups
or national agencies.
It strengthens the overall system
by ensuring communities are functioning
before the system is under stress.
Distress, allowing councils
and agencies to focus on infrastructure
coordination and recovery at scale.
This gives practical effect, the inquiry's recommendation
to recognize people and communities
as an active fourth pillar of emergency management.
In short, the inquiry course for urgent system change,
the Newlands pilot demonstrates
how its recommendations could be translated into practical
action by putting community resilience first
and designing explicitly for the first seven days.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, we'll just come to questions now.
I just had one, I agree with you that, um, community, um,
resilience is essential.
Do you think that there is enough in this bill to promote,
um, community resilience?
Um, I think the idea is there,
what we suggested in our written submission
was acknowledging that more formally than the legislation
You, it, um, Andy, did you Sure.
I have to go back and have a look at what it says in the
legislation, but, um, Rodney, it strikes me over the years,
and I'm most familiar with Wellington, obviously good
to see it, um, most familiar with Wellington, obviously
that we've been a bit like this.
It's been a sort of bit of a rollercoaster in terms
of the engagement between the authorities of getting a nod
as well, the engagement between the authorities
and the councils, et cetera, and the community in terms
of the expectations, the support of, um,
the community to be prepared.
Um, does that ring true for you that it's,
it's not been consistent, it's been up and down,
Um, in the six years it's taken to get to, to this point,
it's been statically down, consistently down,
which is why we made a decision as a board
on the 3rd of July last year to instead of raise investment
to fund us, we're trying to catalyze 300 residents
to collectively implement this over 18 months so
that we are doing it as a community without
external support.
So I was just wondering in terms of the,
the question I was gonna ask about the bill is whether there
is, because if we, if we put a, uh,
an onus on the authorities at each different level,
whether it's nationally or, or locally
or regionally, um, to monitor that level
of community engagement, to require that support and,
and engagement, and then to monitor, um, that,
and that includes personal preparedness,
but also the community preparedness.
When you measure, you tend to get, when you measure,
you tend to get engagement of the authorities.
When you don't measure, it gets outta sight, outta mind.
Is that is a reasonable, reasonable thing to, to,
I guess our response to
that would be we're developing this sustainable model
and we've been measuring community
and disaster resilience
for six years now using the treasury living standards
framework lined up to the government's resilience framework.
So we are measuring that to identify the vulnerabilities
data, keeping the trend lines up to 2030, static at best,
declining at worst, which to us just isn't good enough.
Thank You. Laga,
Thank, which is why we're doing what we're doing.
We, we are part of the solution
and we think it's complimentary
to what's being discussed here.
Um, it's been hard work, but we've got a sense of momentum.
Yeah.
So thank you. So just actually following
on from Andy's question
In terms of the community resilience,
'cause uh, you talk in your submission
and your written submission,
the readiness is social investment.
So obviously every community it would be that they're ready
because when something happens, you're ready to go.
Can you, um, elaborate, uh,
on the community re resilience,
because that's sort of like a period of time
and do you think some of that is covered in the bill?
It'll probably more of a local level as,
but an overarching sort of theme around community resilience
as a partner to emergency funders?
Yeah, I mean, I, I think if we
do our job properly at community level, it's going
to be better for everyone including the emergency responders
because we are well connected on the ground.
Um, we are seeing community resilience as
building social economic
and cultural cohesion across 14,000 people in one suburb.
And that's our main focus calendar 2026.
And then in about March next year, we would start six months
disaster resilience model that we've developed in
consultation with Remo
because we don't, we think the community needs, there needs
to be high trust connections
and cohesion culturally, socially, and economically
before we think it's worth implementing
the model we've developed.
And we think that would take six months next year.
And in the meantime, other suburbs are approaching us
to talk about how they could adopt
and adapt it and it would be free.
And just two quick questions.
Do you have a connection into young people in your area
and also diverse? Oh
My gosh, the quick, um, yes.
Okay. Through the intermediate and the college.
Yeah. Um, I think that your idea is really aligned with
where a lot of the, uh, work,
especially the Remo work has been in terms of their, um,
discussions around community resilience
and you know, how they have, um, specifically ideas
around even seeing Wellington as a, as a series
of islands after an emergency.
And so that seems really consistent with that. Um,
But we've, sorry, we've seen the need
to do more than they offer Yeah, yeah.
Is actually a ground, a groundswell
and some momentum amongst residents. Yeah.
So does that, so in terms of what they're doing to,
do you, you see what you're doing as compliment,
you don't see them as stopping work that needs
to be done in your area, very much fix,
Correct. We see them as supporting
us in some
areas Yeah. And what we're doing.
Okay. Thank you. Um,
we've had just a start from Andy and then Melissa. Oh,
Look, I was just gonna go back to, um,
just quickly just looking at the functions
of the various emergency management committees,
which are proposed under the bill.
One of them talks about, um, that the responsibility is
to ensure that sustainably, sorry, ensure
that suitably trained and competent personnel,
including volunteers that are available
and there's an appropriate organizational structure
for those personnel for the effective
emergency management in its area.
And then it also has a, a monitoring
and report on compliance for this area.
So that would tend to suggest to me
that there is a requirement
for the emergency management committees to know
that there's a voluntary component
of this community component and to monitor that.
Does that seem like a strong enough sort of arrangement
to say, actually you can't just ignore the community in
preparing your emergency plan?
No, but I think there is something about
making it a bit easier, perhaps.
Uh, we've had to reach out
to five different Wellington networks
and five national providers individually
to develop this model that's just trying
to connect all the different networks
and organizations that are,
we're not doing anything different other than trying
to make the most of what already exists
and make that clear to residents
how they can be part of that.
Yeah. Okay. No, thank You. Um, Melissa, um,
I just wanted to put this, if I happen to be a resident,
I imagine it's, it's, it's, it's an if
and I don't speak English.
I'm a new migrant to New Zealand.
I live with an elderly parent who speaks no English.
How would they actually engage with you
and what would you have actually done to me or to my family?
Great question. In the last couple of months
that you are actually sort of,
you know, planning all of this.
Yes. So how would you have engaged
and what would I have actually benefited from it?
Right. There's a few questions there. Sorry.
What we are hoping to is initially gather 200
people from different ethnicities and, and,
and cultures who love gathering people,
and they gather them into groups.
And we wrap a whole lot of support around those 200,
what we calling community connectors,
professional supervision, mentoring, support, an that,
that helps 'em navigate, um, quarterly training,
quarterly catch ups.
So we want to love
and support those 200 community connectors,
and I'm really,
really hoping they're across all the ethnicities.
Yeah. What I'm actually saying is that
what would I have actually gotten out of it to prepare for,
prepare me for an emergency that could actually happen,
that could be a disaster. Okay.
So by this, by September, 2026,
we would hope to have all those groups connected
so they all know each other
and they all know how they can help their neighbors
to meet local needs with local offers
and whichever part of Newlands that is.
Thank you. Practically. Yeah. Well,
We've run out of time, sadly, but That's right.
Yeah. That's, um, really interesting information.
I can give a real practical example in 15 seconds. Okay.
Yep. So Jim
and Jill are running the neighbor, the neighborhood group,
and a part of Newlands.
Um, um, Andre comes running over saying his wife Andrea is
under a concrete block bleeding out after the earthquake.
What I need my, the community connectors
to know is we are the local builder, is
that got the earth weaving equipment
and where the local first data is.
It is not good enough, from my perspective
to have the best will in the world,
but unable to help someone.
Mm-hmm. Great. Does that make it, yeah.
Really helpful. Thank you so much for your submission
and for, um, appearing in front
of us today and answering your question.
Thank you. We really appreciate it.
Our next submitter is local government New Zealand,
who are joining us on Zoom.
Thank You. Thank you.
Camera. Okay. Uh, just, so who was it?
Local government, uh, ley.
Oh, Ainsley. Welcome.
Uh, thank you very much for your, uh,
written submission, which we've got a copy of.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes to hear from you
and, uh, keen to, keen to hear, uh,
if you've got any additional comments to make.
And, and if you wish, you can leave some time
for questions over to you.
Great. Thank you. Um, yeah, we were supposed to be joined
by, um, M ltz, um, to do the, OR submission today,
but unfortunately it doesn't seem like she's online.
So I'll just, um,
Team there is anyone else?
We'll, just checking, um, ley just to see
If she's there. She should write
in the chat room.
Oh, just coming on now.
Oh, welcome.
Um, sorry about that. Um, good.
Um, thank you for having us today.
For those of you that dunno me, my name is ltz.
I am the president of local government New Zealand, and,
and Ainsley will be joining us today.
Um, you would be well aware
and just like we see here in the Gisborne region,
that we are seeing more frequent
and severe weather events
that are affecting communities way more regularly than
what we used to see.
And we need an emergency management system that is ready
to meet this escalating risk.
And we welcome the emergency management bill.
It provides clearer roles, stronger coordination,
and also a more consistent national approach, which is
so, um, needed.
Um, but we need to be honest about
what is happening in local government currently.
There's a lot of pressure if you think
of all the reforms happening.
Uh, I, we are worried that
the system cannot deliver on the bill's, um, um, ambition.
So I'll talk a little bit. I've just got three areas
that I would like to highlight,
and you've received our written submission.
We do support a strong modern emergency management system,
but we must be honest about how we are going to pay for it.
Um, the, this bill increases expectations on councils at the
same time as we are facing multiple
overlapping reforms, each adding new responsibilities
as well as costs.
Um, if we just use one example,
like say the proposed rate caps, that will significantly
limit council's ability to meet new obligations.
And, um, I suspect many councils will simply not have the
means to deliver what the bill requires.
And this, uh, this creates a real risk for us
that the bill's objectives will be undermined
by uneven implementation, which is absolutely not
what we want if we are looking for national consistency
with some communities better protected than others.
And, um, one thing we want to highlight as well,
that funding cannot continue to be reactive.
Uh, we see it here in the Gisin region.
Uh, currently we're still in a state of emergency.
Um, we have support that are reactive.
All of us arrives after a disaster.
What we know what would work better is sustained
upfront investment in resilience, hazard reduction,
community capability,
and also preparedness upfront investment pays off.
We know that it is much cheaper to invest
before emergency happened so
that when they happen there is less impact.
Um, we're asking for a clearer commit,
clearer commitment from central government
to co-funding emergency management functions
and resilience work, not just the response and recovery.
This will save New Zealand a significant money in the medium
as well as long term.
Next, I want to move to point number two is, uh,
recognizing iwi Maori in communities.
We've all seen Mara open their doors
in the last three weeks.
I know currently, um,
there are still people living in emergency housing at
Mara in our region.
Um, and we want to make sure Iwi is across
and part of that decision making.
And we do support the bill steps towards representation on
the kicks or the co coordinating executives groups
and planning for Office of as assistance.
But these mechanisms do not yet reflect the scale
of consistency of iwi
and community in, uh, involvement across all phases,
which is the readiness, which is very important.
Then the response, and then moving on to recovery.
Um, we suspect without strongest structural support
and resourcing engagement will remain uneven
and also overly reliant on voluntary effort,
which isn't fair, and it is also not sustainable.
Then the last point I would like to speak
to is regulations can't be one size fits all.
Um, we support national minimum standards
to support consistency and clarity across the new system.
Councils vary enormously in size, geography,
what their hazard profiles are, and also the capacity.
Um, what is reasonable
for a large metropolitan council may be totally unachievable
for a small rural one.
Um, standards must be risk-based, proportionate
and flexible, not one size fits all.
And I think council, we will all agree that councils need
to be formally consulted on regulations
to get this balance right.
Um, councils will also need support to implement those, um,
practical guidelines, templates, targeted support,
especially for our smaller
and rural councils that lack that specialist staff.
The cost that standards could shift onto councils,
particularly those with low rate payer basis
across large geographic areas, also will need
to be supported with appropriate funding
and some funding tools.
That's us. This is local government New Zealand.
Just summarizing where we are at.
And you do have our written submission,
but I'm happy to answer questions.
Um, if you have any.
Thank you Mayor. Stats, we appreciate, um, the submission.
I had a question, uh, to open up with around the, uh, issue
that you raised around the definition
of disproportionately affected communities.
Uh, in your written submission, you've, you've stated
that it's a bit too broad
and may create uncertainty for councils.
And so I just wondered, um,
I think it's sounds from your comments
that you're generally supportive of the, you know,
greater inclusion and making sure that the plans are, um,
appropriate to the community.
So what's a better way that we could, uh,
assist councils, uh, through this bill?
If this, if in your view this definition is not,
um, sufficiently clear,
I might ask Ainsley to, to talk to that if she wants to,
and then I can wrap it up.
Thank you. Yeah.
Um, yeah, I think maybe the definition itself could be a bit
more principle based
and include sort of a, um,
a coverage across different communities that might expect it
to be in that category.
Um, also some support
and guidance around that for councils around what sort
of communities, how they might be best reached.
Um, that sort of thing could be valuable as well.
Okay, thank you. That's, that's really helpful.
We'll definitely look into that. Um, Andy Foster,
Nice to, uh, nice to see you there.
Um, just wanted to ask this question.
I've asked both the officials and the minister, the,
the relationship between, um, the emergency management bill
and, uh, resource management, uh, land use, uh, trying
to avoid problems in the first place.
Um, so we stopped building things
that probably shouldn't be built in the wrong places.
Um, do you think we've got that right?
Do you think there's enough, um,
enough link there in your view?
I mean, you obviously administer a district plan as well,
uh, between the emergency management requirements
to make people safe
and you know, where people are building,
developing, living and so on.
Um, there's a great connection there,
but just like I highlighted earlier is the massive work
that we are currently doing
and trying to make sure
in our spatial plans in the new RMA framework
where we decide people can live, where they should not live,
where they are risk is the risk proportionate
to the interventions we are proposing.
And lining that up with the new emergency management bill is
so very important
because like I said earlier, we can't change the weather.
I didn't say that earlier, but I'll say it now.
We can't change the weather, we can't change the geology of
what we're dealing with.
What we can change is have better land use practice so
that then when we do see these events,
there is naturally better protection, not only
for communities, but also for infrastructure.
No, that's cool. So do you think there's more that we need
to do in the legislation in that space,
or do you think it's okay?
I think there's always more that we can do.
And, and it comes down to, again, that one size fits all.
There are different risks for different re regions
and risks that might be current
for the RA might not be current for say, the Gisin area.
So I do think it is very important to make sure
whatever lens we put over that is appropriate for
that region, even though we are, um, aiming
to national standards, there need
to be some flexibility in there.
No, thank you. Thank you. That is all the time.
We, uh, sorry, Mike, did you, quick question,
Uh, just, just quickly 'cause you,
you talk about obviously the pressures
of additional costs from these changes.
So I'm just sort of wondering how the conversations are
going with officials about, I guess, um, any, um, reductions
of those cost pressures to, uh, local government.
So I'm not across any discussions that's happened yet.
I know that it's roughly, I think $86 million across the
whole system.
And if you think that there are 77 councils,
which means it might only mean $1 million per council,
but add onto that the other work, like the RMA changes,
the regional council changes, all those different changes.
A million dollars here, a million dollars there is not
achievable or affordable for smaller communities.
Thank you so much. We have run out of time now,
but we really appreciate you both for joining us today
and for your, uh, written
submission too. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks.
We now have our next submitters,
which is the New Zealand Veterinary Association,
who I believe are joining us in person. Welcome
And online. Oh, and
online. Okay. We'll see if we can get that,
um, that sorted for you.
We've got 10 minutes to hear from you.
We do have a copy of your Russian submission as well.
Same drill as before. Sure.
You're welcome to use as, as much time as you wish
or leave some time for questions. Yeah,
No, we'd leave some time for questions, so thank you.
Um, and, and it's great to be here. Thank you for that.
So I'm Kevin Bryant, chief executive at Veer.
I've got Leanne Fixer, who's our emergency management lead
and manages our, our events and operations
and online, uh, Dr.
Will Halladay, he's a vet.
He sits on a couple of our committees of members.
He's a chairperson of the member advisory group
to the board committee and a member of our board.
Uh, so we're going to bounce between us a little bit.
Uh, we've made two previous submissions in 23 and 25 and,
and they were informed by the experiences of our members,
uh, during events over those periods of time.
Um, we're really pleased with the, the,
the proposed changes in the legislation
that reflects three key elements that, that we've advocated
for, which is firstly, formal recognition
that animals are sentient, bes.
Secondly, that animals should be
prioritized ahead of property.
And thirdly, the animal welfare is explicitly included
within the responsibilities of the emergency response team.
So really pleased with that progress.
And we are here today to talk about the fourth area
that we want to advocate on.
And that is that legislation sets a clear expectation
that veterinary professionals who are called upon as part
of an official emergency response are appropriately
compensated for their time and professional contribution.
And this is consistent
with an approach already taken in responses
to animal disease incursion.
So there is a president in, in legislation,
and we believe that same principle should apply
to emergency management.
Veterinarians play a critical role during emergencies.
They're legally obligated under the Animal Welfare Act.
That and the veterinary act to alleviate animal suffering.
They support affected communities
in extremely stressful time.
And critically they play an important role in safeguarding
New Zealand's biosecurity in emergencies.
Veterinarians also carry responsibilities under the Civil
Defense Emergency Management framework,
including advising on access to treatment,
coordinating veterinary support and affected regions
and providing guidance on animal welfare.
And we are part of the, an animal welfare,
emergency emergency management team
that supports national decision making
and the coordination of responses and resources.
So with New Zealand facing a future of more frequent
and more severe weather events, we believe now is the time
for legislative settings
that properly support the ongoing contribution
of veterinarians and their teams
to New Zealand's emergency response system.
'cause at the moment it's a hundred percent voluntary.
So I'd just like to hand over to Dr.
Halliday for a few minutes
'cause he is got some context, uh, descriptions he,
that he can, uh, share in terms of
what vets on the ground are, are dealing with. Thank you.
Thanks very much, Kevin.
Uh, thank you to the committee for accommodating us.
Can you all hear me properly? Yep.
Yes. Yeah. Thank you very much. Okay.
So as Kevin said, I'm here to explain, uh, the reality
that veterinarians, uh, face
and have faced, uh, for example, uh, in Hawke's Bay
and Rafti, uh, in the response
and recovery phases of cyclones, hail and Gabrielle in 2023.
Uh, so those extreme weather events left large areas
of the North Islands East coast without electricity, patchy
to zero phone coverage, uh, and damaged
or destroyed roads and bridges.
Uh, veterinary practices that did manage
to remain open were soon inundated with requests for help
from urban pet owners.
Uh, while reports trickled in from rural areas, uh,
about lost and injured livestock, contaminated feed
and water supplies, and general concern for the wellbeing
of farm neighbors
and their animals, veterinarians like many others, uh,
did swing into action immediately.
Uh, many of them taking the initiative to assess rural roads
to access, uh, for access to their clients,
setting up cross practice networks to ensure coverage
of each other's clients,
and even hiring helicopter time to reach cutoff communities
and to deliver supplies.
One vet devoted significant personal time away from her
family for a cutoff community to treat injured animals
and assist farmers with triage.
All of this was done on, on the good faith assumption
that any legitimate expense would be fairly compensated
following those response.
But sadly, some of these costs have never been recovered.
One practice in Hawke's Bay, uh,
estimates losses in the tens of thousands from their efforts
during the response, as well
as the significant toll on veterinarian's wellbeing,
which has resulted in at least one experienced local
vet leaving the profession.
I'd like to remind you that these were time critical,
potentially life
and death decisions made
by qualified animal welfare professionals
who did not have access to communications
and certainly had no time to wait
for permission from a committee in Wellington.
The simple knowledge that there can be funding available
to cover emergency expenses in times of disaster,
or provide confidence to veterinary practices that they can,
for example, fill a helicopter with dog food
or sheep dip to alleviate animal suffering in a
cutoff rural community.
And they'll be fairly compensated
that simply doing the right thing
for animal welfare isn't going to drive them outta business.
And so, on behalf of my colleagues in the profession,
I do urge the committee to recognize this
and please act accordingly. Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks very much, um, for your submission.
Is there anything else to add?
Just one small point
that the New Zealand Veterinary Association has invested
significant time and money
and creating resources to support vets
and clinics in, in emergency situations.
So we've created playbooks, templates, training, uh,
so that, that they can be as equipped as possible.
And, and that's part of the readiness phase.
So we are not looking for everything to be funded
and the voluntary stuff will still happen,
but as will said, a fair compensation
where genuine cash has been spent, uh,
supporting communities.
Thank you. Uh, the, oh, do you have a question?
Yes, yes. I,
I just wanted to, and, and it kind of picks up on
that point, it might be for Dr.
Holiday, but who should foot the bill for things like that
where it's in the case?
I think you mentioned at the end where it might be needed
to get, you know, I think you used dog food as an example
to one, but when you have to go
and do that kind of thing, who should ultimately, who,
who should pay the bill for that kind of thing?
Well, we think the, the opportunity
that's presented in the legislation as it as it reads now is
that for the local response managers,
the incident controllers, uh,
sounds like they're gonna be given more
responsibility and budget.
That's where it should sit.
And so as part of that local conversation,
they can make a decision to say, yes, we're going
to actually, uh, support veterinarians to support animals.
And, and so just just so I'm clear on that, no,
no one disputes the great work that you've done.
There's some amazing stories of how you've helped and,
and some really tough situations.
I just wanna acknowledge that.
But, um, what I am hearing is that would sit with the,
the local council within their response in terms
of if this was in the, uh, ra,
it would be maybe it's South RA
and it's that council that would be responsible
for funding within that region.
Is that what you are suggesting?
Yeah, we, we believe that make the, the,
the decision making and the money as close to the point
of action as possible,
because as we all learn, uh, when you've gotta go
outside region in those crisis, you can't,
But it's those, but it's a local rate
payer responsibility.
No, I see this as a, as a government,
Taxpayers should be funded, The government
funded initiative.
Okay. Councils, as we've heard,
councils don't have the resources.
Yeah, that, that was gonna be my question too.
And but also just really appreciate your comments
around the changes in this bill compared
to the previous version on animal welfare.
And I think the majority
of submissions on the previous bill,
we are actually on the fact that there needed
to be a greater consideration
of animal welfare within the bill.
And that's not only for the safety of animals,
but also understanding that relationship between people and,
and animals and that, and the fact
that people will not be safe if they're, um,
if there're animals
that they're responsible for are not safe.
In terms of, I know that that's not one
of your major recommendations,
but in terms of the changes that have been put in place,
are you now comfortable with those other provisions?
Yeah, look, it's a little bit difficult to interpret how
how the legislation will be, will be interpreted,
but our reading of it, the answer is yes. Um, mm-hmm.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Question. Thank you. Yeah.
Quick question, Melissa. Um,
I just wanna, um, talk to, um, Dr.
Holiday in regards to the emergencies
that actually happened, um, with the, um, uh,
cyclone Gabrielle and all of the, uh, Hawke's area.
Were you in fact connected to see them,
civil defense emergency people, uh, in terms of the way
that you, um, your doctors, your veterinarians actually, uh,
flew helicopters actually delivered, um,
um, dog food and stuff?
Uh, yes. So, um, were they away? Ye yes and no.
Um, the, um, yeah,
we couldn't get helicopter time without going through Sedum.
Uh, however, the, uh, it,
it did become pretty obvious pretty quickly that, uh,
sedum was, how shall I say, overwhelmed.
Um, and, and probably didn't have a, a full appreciation
for the extent of the issue in rural communities,
especially those that were cut off
and didn't have, um, communication.
Alright, Thank you.
We've now run out of time,
but thank you very much, um, for the work that you do,
especially in an emergency situations and for submitting
and, and for being present with us
today and answering our questions. We appreciate it. Thanks
Very much. Appreciate the time.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.
We now have, uh, our next submitter, max Marshall,
who understand is Lauren with us.
Thank you.
Welcome. We've got, um, five minutes, uh,
to hear from you, a shorter period of time
as an individual, so over, over to you.
Yeah. Um, well, thank you, um, Madam Chair,
uh, members of the panel.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak.
I'm concerned that we are building a way to disaster
building on land that puts us in, in the way of danger
that the objective, that objective
of certainty is hard to doubt.
Treasury produced a doc, um, a document,
the best practice regulation model, which states
the regulatory system should be predictable to certainty,
to re regulated entities
and be consistent with other policies that, with
the change, and just that, with the change from prescriptive
at a prescriptive building regulatory system
to a more performance oriented system, many of the decisions
were that were made around building consents approval was
to develop land on, on risks.
In terms of extreme nash, um, natural events, we've,
we've seen with the leaky housing crisis, the year
of performance regulation approach
to provide better flexibility
and durability has not been successful.
Flexibility did not lead to durable regulation.
I've expressed the concern
that many disasters arise from the development of land,
which was exposed to risk.
The example I give is of housing,
of housing developments keeping been given the go ahead
to build on low lying planes prone, prone
to flooding in Melbourne.
There is considerable housing development in the southern
southeastern outskirts towards Clyde North and Ingham.
What we are seeing is the transaction costs for disasters
that happen down the road are often socialized in the red
tape, which trans, which, uh, the transaction,
um, costs for the, um, developer is removed.
While, while I support blind binding principles
that are backed by non-binding rules, I'm aware
that principles or standards are no more likely
to produce certainty.
The true cost may not be known at the time,
but I might add we end up paying either way.
We have seen increased inference towards planning in terms
of some national interest.
The, the efficacy of many regulations is never assessed.
And when it is assessed, it is usually
before the regulations are, um, implemented.
The, the point we know least about them,
I would favor a principle based approach where compliance
with detailed rules does not provide a safe harbor, such
as compliance with the rules
or, um, guarantee compliance with the principle.
Um, my final words are from framing the Collins, the Commons
from Victoria University Law Foundation, uh,
accordingly, perhaps the most frequently encountered,
but also the most, uh, most issue
for contemporary regulatory design is not concordant
with the rule of law, but with the way in which the concepts
of certainty and discretion interact with the values
of efficacy and legitimacy.
This is because it's frequently unclear which of this, which
of the certainty
or discretion is more likely as a matter
of regulatory design to achieve regulatory ob object
or objects, even if the past efficacy can
be identified with clarity.
Efficacy is not merely a matter of regulatory words,
but of practical implica implementation
and administration of regulatory systems.
This efficacy requires investment and comes at a cost.
The future cost required to achieve efficacy
may be unknown at the outset
and grow significantly, significantly over time
for countries such as New Zealand seeking
to address the full range of regulatory problems
with limited resources.
This last matter is of, uh, special is especially
is an especially important issue.
And I have one other, um, side note.
Um, I'd like to, um,
and that's to do with, um, use of churches as, um,
uh, emergency centers.
Thank you. Well, thank you so much Max.
Uh, we have actually used up all your time now,
but I want to really, uh, thank you for coming in in person
and also for your two written
submissions that you provided to us.
So thank you so much for providing Thank you.
Your thoughts on this bill? Thank you. All good.
Now, last, um, submitter of the Day is Federated Farmers,
and I think we've got, um, Sandra
and friend joining us.
Welcome.
Thank you very much for joining us.
You know, you are missing out on the, uh, barbecue outside
and to provide your submission,
but we've got, um, a copy of your written submission here
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you. So over to
You. Well, thank
you so much
and I acknowledge you, um, Miller as chair and,
and thank the rest of the committee for our time.
Sandra Faulkner.
I am the Federated Farmer Spokesperson for Adverse Events.
Uh, along with Mitchell, I'll allow to introduce himself.
Kura. I'm Mitch. I'm a senior policy
advisor at Federated Farmers.
So I work in the adverse space with Sandra.
Welcome, Mitch. So
to put a not too fine point on our submission today,
we absolutely support the development
of the new legislation.
Our role in emergencies within federated farmers is very
much around the, uh, hot dial when events occur.
So when we know that we have a weather event,
when there has been an earthquake,
certainly when there has been biosecurity
or indeed human health incursions on hot dial
for both local authority
and often central government as the,
as the local provincial president for federated farmers.
So we are very experienced in providing
that rural expertise when the proverbial hits the
pan, basically.
So again, I reiterate our strong support of the bill.
The overall intent, uh, reflects years
of consistent feedback from us
as an organization across a pan sector, uh, approach
to rural businesses, families, and their communities.
The rural must remain in the explicit intent,
the decision making, if you like, of this new legislation.
So the past responses, uh,
we have seen across the country
and particularly around, you know,
I'm sure many times about Gabriel and its, uh,
and its sister, um,
but rural was there prior to the events.
It was there during the response,
it was there during the recovery.
And we remain in those communities.
So what we would like to see is the ability for
rural, uh, contribution
to remain explicit within the legislation for planning,
for response, and for recovery.
Uh, obviously we, uh, would support, uh,
as you've heard earlier this afternoon from the veterinary
council, the inclusion of animal welfare.
Uh, and, and note that in the legislation
and then also, uh, a note around, uh, the reimbursement
and protections of those who,
who put their hand up at times of need.
Uh, they're routinely, uh, the first responders
with the tractor, with the front end loader.
Uh, they are the ones
who are reaching out to their rural networks.
They're also the, the folk
that invariably provide the intelligence, uh,
the communications
that come back into the sim structure at the table
of which we are now all becoming
unfortunately very familiar with.
So we see this as a really important opportunity to
lock rural representation into those three
so important aspects of how we respond to both Mother nature
and other aspects, uh, around, as I say,
planning response, recovery.
We are part of that. Thank you. Thank
You so much. We do have
some questions. We'll start with Andy Foster.
Yeah, thanks Sandra. Um, good to see you. Thank you, Mitch.
Um, just in terms of that, the access to equipment.
I was on the West coast recently
and they were talking about, you know, um, ability
to access equipment
and, you know, like the mine's got that yes,
farmers' got this and so on.
Just, we know it's there,
but the planning around it saying what do we know so
that when, when that that
planning's being done, what do we know?
Is there that, you know, Bill's got one of those
and Trevor's got one of those,
and you know, whatever, um, that the,
there's actually an awareness of what sort
of equipment is there to be able to help out in a situation
where, you know, you particularly need heavy equipment.
Mm-hmm. Clearly at a high line, you're looking at the,
at the planning aspect.
Mm. Of civil defense and emergency management.
So, uh, your local CD DM plan is developed
around knowing your local communities.
You know, we consider forestry to be a very strong part
of our overall response.
Mm-hmm. Yep. Uh, particularly around Gabriel.
And I should add that I lead the agricultural, uh, response
and recovery in, uh, the region post Gabriel.
Uh, so I had plenty of experience about, uh,
dragging this right back to a back of the envelope response
because we had no electricity,
we had no communications in the early days.
This came down to who we knew were out in the rural areas,
be they forestry, farming, horticulture,
or indeed just lifestyle blocks.
Uh, who we knew were out there,
what we knew they had on hand,
and then equally what they would possibly need.
So the, the, uh, the back of the envelope data
that we were able to gather was just immensely,
uh, valuable at the time.
Uh, and we needed that ability to
step into the SIMS model, mandated
to step into the SIMS model so that it made it
so much easier for our Civil defense group controllers
and those teams to use that information
because there's a, a very basic level, uh,
and this is just an, uh, a single situation.
We had to gather the data, load it onto a flash drive,
walk out of our room that we were working in, down the hall,
down the next hall into the civil defense space,
plug it into the side of a laptop for them to be able
to use the information
that we knew was at the heart of our response.
And then every time we updated it, we had to go
through that process again. It was ridiculous.
So that having the local committees, et cetera,
as you go down through the cascades
and through the system that's been set up, um, having the,
the rural communities explicitly represented the
Iwi communities specifically
Represented absolutely. Is really
important because that means that as we gather
that information, as we share that information, both in
and out of the EC
or the emergency coordinating center, uh, we know
that we don't have to waste time walking down the hall,
putting a flash drive on the side of somebody's computer.
So yeah, it, it is a, a, um, such an integral response now
that we need to cut out all of that. So
Thank you.
Thank you, chair. Um, thank you for your promise.
I'm just really interested in that backup model.
Everything sounds, is manual.
How do you, and is it covered in terms of the bill sort
of looking at systems like that for the rural community,
for very, um, it's the, your local knowledge
that everyone relies on.
So rather than just here, how do you transfer that
to our system?
Manual system?
Uh, well, clearly we have a very strong SIMS model
that's been developed in the, in the fires, if you like.
So, uh, this is not a request
to break the model in any way, shape and form.
This is the opportunity to feed into it, so,
and feed into it in its most efficient fashion.
So from the point of view of getting what we knew
into a group controller's ability to manage the situation,
uh, it would become, we would become an explicit part
of the intelligence function of sims.
We would be, we are by nature, part of the operations
function sims, there, there is no function within Sims
that rural communities don't already currently inhabit.
So what we are looking for is that ability
to feed into the planning so that it becomes second nature
to think about our people that live
outside the 50 K zone. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, you would've heard the, uh,
and I think you mentioned it, uh, in your comments,
the submissions from the Veteran Veterinary Association
compensation, and I know in your written submission you also
have a, um, uh, an ask around, uh, fair kind of compensation
for those rural communities responding as well in terms of
how that would actually work in,
in terms of the funding for that.
And, and would you see that as, as compensation for loss
of time or just for costs incurred?
So can you just maybe unpack how, how you see that working?
Absolutely. Farmers, growers, rural
communities have always responded.
Uh, that is an absolute.
So what we are looking
to support is very much the costs incurred.
So yeah, the, the, the o the obvious one is the,
is the farmer in his fronting loader clearing the road so
that you can access your neighbors or indeed the local ECC
or whatever it is, um, diesel, you know?
Yeah. Even just an acknowledgement that
they are seen in their efforts that they are encouraged
to be part of ongoing efforts.
And, and I assume that would be, I mean, we've,
I've heard some feedback from some communities
that actually sometimes the requirements for receiving, uh,
reimbursements can be quite arduous.
You know, oh, do you have a receipt for
that diesel when you filled up?
You might not have known that you're
gonna use it for an emergency.
So are there, are there kind of ways that we can make
that system, um, obviously high trust but also flexible and,
and retaining that kind of accountability that we'd need?
And public funding, have you put any,
Well, understanding your, and this is
where we are being part of the planning process is just
so important because understanding your communities, uh, is
how you would look to address that,
because you would know that, um, farmer a lives at the top
of, you know, that that watershed
or that roading network, uh,
and he has X amount of fuel in the same way
that you would know that, uh,
forestry team are working in a particular forest.
And you would be able to reach out to 'em
and say, you know, do you have something
that can help us clear this road?
Or, or whatever it is that they're looking to do.
I think there is a high trust model
that can be built into the current NEMA structure.
You still need the accountability.
I think that's really important
because there is no place for writing out blank checks here.
What there is very much a case for is recognizing the effort
and the cost incurred.
Thank You. Can I ask just a second commentary on
That? Yeah. Yes.
Final question,
Just 'cause I just wanna try
and pick out some of the, like the example you gave
where it's about the cost
of diesel, it's to help the public.
It, it seems really clear
in terms of what's happening there.
If you take the last example that we heard from one
of the vets was around dog food.
Now, I would think if that's going to the farmer,
they, they would've bought it.
The probably the, the, the, the dog owner is happy to pay
for the dog food themselves,
but it might be the difficulty in getting through.
So it's that public good of providing the service
that actually where we are looking at
how do we cover the cost rather than the product
for personal use the case of a farmer clearing the road.
It's clearly for the community, right?
It's not, it's not about them compared to the, the farmer
that is rebuilding a fence on their
own land for their own purpose.
Is there a difference in there or do you just see the whole
thing as everything should be covered?
What, what would your view be
There? Again, it comes down
to planning
and understanding your local communities.
Yeah. What is, what is the community need?
Now, your dog food one is a classic example
where the massive generosity that we see of New Zealanders
to respond to events as they come to our,
you know, as they come to us.
Uh, I know for, and I'll,
and I'll use Gabriel again as a as an example, we ended up
with, uh, an entire section
of the a MP show hall stocked with,
uh, feed.
That's right. Yep. So there is a massive amount of, uh,
or a massive showing of the generous spirit
of the nature of New Zealanders.
And so then you're thinking, well, how do we, you're,
you're, you're effectively looking to lock that into the,
the current sim structure, air operations, helicopter time.
How do we take that donated product out to where it's needed
beyond the broken roads, beyond the broken bridges, um,
built on the fact that we understand that rural community,
we know that beyond that bridge, we've got shepherds
with teams of dogs.
Uh, you know, we've got a community who may have X number
of companion animals.
Mm. Uh, and, and then again, the, the, the next step of that
of course is infrastructure rebuild.
Uh, and the fact that, you know,
Gabriel was set at a time when,
or hit us at a time when we were in the middle of needing,
um, treatment for fly strike for animals.
We were wanting to get used to the ram,
they needed vaccinations.
There was, there was a timeline of farming, a flow of
farming requirements across the year
that isolation can have a very, very significant impact on.
Right. So it's actually locking into, again,
the sim structure, operations, air Ops Don donated product.
Thank you so much. We have run outta
time, so we could talk to you all day.
But thank you so much for, um, your submission
and for answering our questions.
We appreciate you coming in, in person as well. Lovely.
Thank you so much. Thanks so much. I appreciate your time.
You, that's our, uh.